STAC-22870: add reference docs and guide for otel component and relation mappings (#159)
rancher/stackstate-product-docs: docs/latest/modules/en/pages/setup/otel/otelmappings/topology-from-otel-guide.adoc

A relation mapping describes how a connection between two components is created.

Each relation mapping:

* Resolves a `sourceId` and a `targetId`.
* Assigns a relation type.
* Produces a directed edge.

Relations are created once both the source and target components exist.

== Creating service components from traces
=== Defining what a "service" means

Before writing the mapping, we need to make a design decision.

For this guide, a service is defined as:

* Identified by `service.namespace` + `service.name`.
* Stable across deployments.
* Independent of service instances.

This keeps topology readable and low cardinality.

== Service instance components

Service instance components are already defined and provided by the OpenTelemetry StackPack.

Each service instance:

* Is derived from `service.name`, `service.namespace`, and `service.instance.id`.
* Represents a concrete running instance of a service.
* Is stable across signals (traces and metrics).

Because this mapping already exists, it is not redefined in this guide. Instead, we build on top of it.

== Creating process components from traces

=== Defining what a "process" means

For this guide, a process is defined as:

> * Identified by `process.pid` and executable metadata.

Reviewer: also by hostname. And to be fully correct (what's done in the agent stackpack) we would also need to include process start time, but lets leave that out of this example, it just complicates things.

ifdef::ss-ff-stackpacks2_enabled[]
= Topology from OpenTelemetry
:revdate: 2025-12-23
:page-revdate: {revdate}
:description: Topology from OpenTelemetry

== Overview

This document provides a getting started guide for OTel component and relation mappings. It walks you through creating a service-level topology from OpenTelemetry trace data, (i.e., local span context) using component and relation mappings, packaged and tested as part of a StackPack.

At the end of this guide, you will have:

* Defined topology components derived from OpenTelemetry traces
* Created relationships that represent synchronous service calls
* Validated the resulting topology using the StackPack test workflow

> == Prerequisites and scope

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Prerequisites
```
In the interest of consistency throughout docs.

This guide assumes:

* You already collect OpenTelemetry traces
* You are creating or extending a StackPack

> * You are comfortable with YAML and basic OTel concepts (resources, spans)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* You already collect OpenTelemetry traces.
* You are creating or extending a StackPack.
* You are comfortable with YAML and basic OTel concepts (resources, spans).
```

We will focus on:

* Trace-based topology (`TRACES` signal only)
* Service-level components
* Synchronous HTTP calls

[NOTE]
====
In this guide, component and relation mappings are expressed as YAML configuration that is packaged, tested, and deployed as part of a StackPack.
====

== The goal: what topology do we want?

> We want to visualize a simple service topology based on how services interact at runtime. Specifically, we want to model the following flow:

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should be saying "we".

Since, we are going in the direction of active voice, I think all mentions of "we" need to be changed as per active voice and the context. 

For example, 

```suggestion
== Configuring topology

The goal is to visualize a simple service topology based on how services interact at runtime and model the following flow:
```

        }
      ]
    },
    {
      "resource": {
        "attributes": [
          { "key": "service.name", "value": { "stringValue": "payment-service" } },
          { "key": "service.namespace", "value": { "stringValue": "shop" } }
        ]
      },
      "scopeSpans": [
        {
          "scope": {
            "name": "io.opentelemetry.instrumentation.http",
            "version": "1.17.0"
          },
          "spans": [
            {
              "traceId": "AEBCDEF0001",
              "spanId": "0003",
              "parentSpanId": "0002",
              "name": "POST /payment",
              "kind": 2,
              "attributes": [
                { "key": "http.method", "value": { "stringValue": "POST" } },
                { "key": "http.status_code", "value": { "intValue": 201 } }
              ]
            }
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
----

=== What matters for topology

From this trace data, we’ll rely on:

* Service identity: `resource.attributes['service.name']`
* Service interactions: `peer.service` on client spans

[NOTE]
====
`peer.service` is a contrived span attribute for the example topology we are visualizing in this guide.
====

> == From traces to topology: the mental model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Traces to topology: the mental model
```

output:
  sourceId: "urn:namespace/${vars.serviceNamespace}:service/${vars.sourceService}"
  targetId: "urn:namespace/${vars.serviceNamespace}:service/${vars.targetService}"
  typeName: "synchronous"
  expireAfter: 600000
----
==== How this mapping works

* We process trace data only (signal: TRACES)
* We require that `service.name` exists at the resource level, and `peer.service` at the span level

The relation identifier is constructed (automatically) from the `sourceId` and `targetId`, and is of the form:

* `sourceId-relationId`

== Validating the OTel mappings

Assuming both mappings live inside your StackPack, they can be tested together.

Using the `sts stackpack test --yes` command, you can:

* Package, upload, and install/upgrade the StackPack
* Validate the declarative component and relation mappings residing in the StackPack (e.g., expression correctness, correct reference of input signal data based on filtering provided)

[NOTE]
====
The `sts stackpack test` command doesn't feed example trace data through the mappings
====

== Resulting topology

When these mappings are applied, the resulting topology forms a service graph derived entirely from trace data.

> Visually, this appears as:

Reviewer: We should include some, short, explanation on how to verify this in the UI (it is not entirely trivial I'm afraid).
